% http://www.notbored.org/new-babylon.html
% No copyrights, rights reserved, advertising or subscriptions.


New Babylon (a nomadic town)
============================

> We are the living symbols of a world without frontiers, a world of freedom,
> without weapons, where each may travel without let or hindrance from the
> steppes of central Asia to the Atlantic Coast, from the high plateau of South Africa
> to the forests of Finland.
>     
> Vaida Voivod III, President of the World Community of Gypsies
> (quoted from an interview published by Algemeen Handelsblad, Amsterdam, 18 May 1963.

For many a year the gypsies who stopped awhile in the little Piedmontese
town of Alba were in the habit of camping beneath the roof that, once a
week, on Saturday, housed the livestock market. There they lit their
fires, hung their tents from the pillars to protect or isolate themselves,
improvised shelters with the aid of boxes and planks left behind by the
traders. The need to clean up the market place every time the Zingari
passed through had led the town council to forbid them access. In
compensation, they were assigned a bit of grassland on the banks of the
Tamaro, the little river that goes through the town: the most miserable of
patches! It's there that in December 1956 I went to see them in the
company of the painter [Guiseppe] Pinot Gallizio, the owner of this
uneven, muddy, desolate terrain, who'd given it to them. They'd closed off
the space between some caravans with planks and petrol cans, they'd made
an enclosure, a 'Gypsy Town.'

That was the day I conceived the scheme for a permanent encampment for the
gypsies of Alba and that project is the origin of the series of maquettes
of New Babylon. Of a New Babylon where, under one roof, with the aid of
moveable elements, a shared residence is built; a temporary, constantly
remodeled living area; a camp for nomads on a planetary scale.


Definitions
-----------

### Utilitarian society

The term designates all known forms of society, including the modern
capitalist and socialist State. It asserts a fundamental reality, the same
for all these forms of community life, old and new, namely the
exploitation of the human being's capacity for work. 'Utility' is the
principle criterion in appreciating man and his activity. The creative
man, Homo Ludens, can only claim his rights on rare occasions.

The opposite of utilitarian society is ludic society, where the human
being, freed by automation from productive work, is at least in a position
to develop his creativity. The terms 'class society' or 'classless
society' do not express, or imperfectly so, this conflict. But it is clear
that a ludic society can only be a classless society. Social justice is no
guarantee of freedom, or creativity, which is the realization of freedom.
Freedom depends not only on the social structure, but also on
productivity; and the increase in productivity depends on technology.
'Ludic society' is in this sense a new concept.


### Homo Ludens

Term used for the first time by Johann Huizinga in a book of that title,
subtitled: 'A Study of the Element of Play in Culture.' In his foreword,
Huizinga speaks of the man who plays in still-measured terms: 'In the
course of time we have come to realize that, after all, we are not as
reasonable as the eighteenth century, with its worship of reason and its
naive optimism, assumed; hence, modern fashion inclines to designate our
species as Homo Farber: Man the Maker. But though faber may not be quite
so dubious as sapiens, it is, as a name specific to the human being, even
less appropriate, seeing that many animals, too, are makers. There is a
third function, however, applicable to both human and animal life, and
just as important as reasoning and making -- namely, playing. It seems to
me that next to Homo Faber, and perhaps on the same level as Homo Sapiens,
Homo Ludens, Man the Player, deserves a place in our nomenclature.'

This discretion in the use of the term can perhaps be explained by the
slight importance utilitarian society gives to play. Homo Ludens has only
ever been a rarely manifested modality of Homo Sapiens, a condition that,
unlike [the condition of] Homo Faber, largely goes unnoticed. Huizinga,
for whom playing is a flight from 'real' life, does not distance himself
in his interpretation from the norms of utilitarian society. And, in his
historical analysis of the theme, he quite rightly situates Homo Ludens in
the upper echelons of society, more precisely within the propertied
leisure class, and not in the laboring masses. However, by separating
capacity for work and production, automation has opened the way to a
massive increase in the number of Homo Ludens. Huizinga nevertheless had
the merit of pointing to the Homo Ludens dormant within each of us. The
liberation of man's ludic potential is directly linked to his liberation
as a social being.


### Social space

Sociologists extend this concept to the aggregate of social relations and
ties that define man's freedom of movement in society, and also, and above
all, its limits. This symbolic interpretation of space is not one we
share. For us, social space is truly the concrete space of meetings, of
the contacts between beings. Spatiality is social.

In New Babylon, social space is social spatiality. Space as a psychic
dimension (abstract space) cannot be separated from the space of action
(concrete space). Their divorce is only justified in a utilitarian society
with arrested social relations, where concrete space necessarily has an
anti-social character.


New Babylon: Outline of a culture
---------------------------------

### The social model

The question of knowing how one would live in a society that knows neither
famine nor exploitation nor work, in a society in which, without
exception, anyone could give free rein to his creativity -- this
troubling, fundamental question awakens in us the image of an environment
radically different from any that has hitherto been known, from any that
has been realized in the field of architecture or urbanism. The history of
humanity has no precedent to offer as an example, because the masses have
never been free, that is, freely creative. As for creativity, what has it
ever meant but the output of a human being?

Yet let us suppose that all nonproductive work can be completely
automated; that productivity increases until the world no longer knows
scarcity; that the land and the means of production are socialized and as
a result global production rationalized; that, as a consequence of this,
the minority ceases to exercise its power over the majority; let us
suppose, in other words, that the Marxist kingdom of freedom is
realizable. Were it to be, we could no longer ask the same question
without instantly attempting to reply to it and to imagine, albeit in the
most schematic manner, a social model in which the idea of freedom would
become the real practice of freedom -- of a 'freedom' that for us is not
the choice between many alternatives but the optimum development of the
creative faculties of every human being; because there cannot be true
freedom without creativity.

If we situate all known forms of society under a single common
denominator, 'utilitarianism,' the model to be invented will be that of a
'ludic' society -- this term designating the activities that, relieved of
all utility as well as all function, are pure products of the creative
imagination. Now, it is as a creator, and only as a creator, that the
human being can fulfill and attain his highest existential level.

In imagining a society in which each man is free to create his life, to
give it shape according to his deepest aspirations, we will not have
recourse to the forms and images of this long period of history in which
man has had to sacrifice the greater part of his creative energy in an
unceasing struggle for existence. Our social model will be, indeed,
fundamentally different from preceding models; it will also be
qualitatively superior.

Let us begin with some basics:

*  Automation of all 'useful,' repetitive activities frees, at the mass level, an energy that can henceforth be directed towards other activities.
*  Collective ownership of the land and the means of production, and rationalization of the production of consumer goods, facilitates the transformation of this energy into creative activity.
*  With productive work disappearing, collective timekeeping has no more raison d'Ãªtre; the masses will, on the other hand, have a considerable amount of free time.


### The network

It is obvious that a person free to use his time for the whole of his
life, free to go where he wants, when he wants, cannot make the greatest
use of his freedom in a world ruled by the clock and the imperative of a
fixed abode. As a way of life Homo Ludens will demand, firstly, that he
responds to his need for playing, for adventure, for mobility, as well as
all the conditions that facilitate the free creation of his own life.
Until then, the principle activity of man had been the exploration of his
natural surroundings. Homo Ludens himself will seek to transform, to
recreate, those surroundings, that world, according to his new needs. The
exploration and creation of the environment will them happen to coincide
because, in creating his domain to explore, Homo Ludens will apply himself
to exploring his own creation. Thus we will be present at an uninterrupted
process of creation and re-creation, sustained by a generalized creativity
that is manifested in all domains of activity.

Starting from this freedom in time and space, we would arrive at a new
kind of urbanization. Mobility, the incessant fluctuation of the
population -- a logical consequence of this new freedom -- creates a
different relation between town and settlement. With no timetable to
respect, with no fixed abode, the human being will of necessity become
acquainted with a nomadic way of life in an artificial, wholly
'constructed' environment. Let us call this environment New Babylon and
add that it has nothing, or almost nothing, about it of a 'town,' in the
traditional sense of the term. The town is a form of urbanization
characteristic of utilitarian society: a fortified place for protection
against a hostile external world, it becomes, as a mercantile center, an
'open town,'; then, with the advent of mechanization, a center of
production -- and at all these different stages it is the place where a
stable population resides, rooted there by a particular way of life. There
are, of course, exceptions to the rule: certain relations between towns
enable a small number of individuals to change their place of residence,
and in so doing trigger a process of acculturation in which the town
acquires, aside from its utilitarian function, the function of a cultural
center. But this phenomenon is relatively infrequent and the number of
individuals involved is not great.

The culture of New Babylon does not result from isolated activities, from
exceptional situations, but from the global activity of the whole world
population, every human being being engaged in a dynamic relation with his
surroundings. There are no a priori links between anyone. The frequency of
each man's movements and the distances he will cover depend on decisions
he will make spontaneously, and which he will be able to renounce just as
simultaneously. Under these conditions social mobility suggests the image
of a kaleidoscopic whole, accentuating sudden unexpected changes -- an
image that no longer bears any similarity to the structures of a community
life ruled by the principle of utility, whose models of behavior are
always the same. In our case, the urban must respond to social mobility,
which implies, in relation to the stable town, a more rigorous
organization on the macro level, and at the same time a greater
flexibility at the micro level, which is that of an infinite complexity.
Freedom of creation demands in any case that we depend as little as
possible on material contingency. It presupposes, then, a vast network of
collective services, more necessary to the population in movement than to
the stable population of functional towns. On the other hand, automation
leads to a massive concentration of production in gigantic centers,
situated outside the space of daily life.

The centers of production outside this space and the collective facilities
inside it determine the general lines of the macro-structure in which,
under the influence of indeterminate movements, there will be defined a
more differentiated and necessarily more flexible micro-structure.

From these two preconditions -- the optimum organization of material
conditions and the maximum development of each person's sense of
initiative -- we can deduce the essentials of a structure that is no
longer composed of nuclei, as in the traditional settlement, but is
organized according to the individual and collective covering of distance,
of errancy: a network of units, linked one to the other, and so forming
chains that can develop, be extended in every direction. Within these
chains are found the services and everything pertaining to the
organization of social life, in the "links" of the network, the entirely
automated units of production, from which man is absent.

The basic elements of the network, the SECTORS, are autonomous units of
construction, which nevertheless intercommunicate. The sector network is
perceived from within as a continuous space.

New Babylon ends nowhere (since the earth is round); it knows no frontiers
(since there are no more national economies) or collectivities (since
humanity is fluctuating). Every place is accessible to one and all. The
whole earth becomes home to its owners. Life is an endless journey across
a world that is changing so rapidly that it seems forever other.


### Realization

The building of New Babylon can only begin once the economy is exclusively
aimed at the satisfaction of our needs, in the widest sense of the term.
Only such an economy permits the complete automation of non-creative
activities, and consequently the free development of creativity.

The implementation of New Babylon is a slow process of growth of a
sectorial world that progressively replaces pre-existing urban structures.
At first one sees, in among the conglomerates, isolated sectors appear
that become poles of attraction for the former to the extent that, with
the time consumed in work diminishing, the settlement becomes
disorganized. During this time, the sectors are meeting places,
socio-cultural centers of a kind; then, as their number is augmented and
the links that unite them increased, activity within the sectors becomes
specialized and increasingly autonomous in relation to the residential
areas.

A New Babylonian way of life then begins to be defined, which takes off
when the regrouped sectors make up a network: a structure that can compete
with the settlement structures, whose significance is progressively
downgraded as man ceases to take part in the production process. The same
phenomenon being produced in many places, one will see many sectors group
together, unite and form a whole. From then on, fluctuation will increase.

In the first phase, the distance between sectors and groups of sectors
increases the demand for rapid means of locomotion. Crossing residential
areas from one sector to another must be as brief as possible. Later, when
the sectorial world is unified and fluctuation intensifies, there is no
longer need to move quickly to change milieu. The flexibility of internal
space in the sectors admits of multiple variations in environment and
ambiance across relatively constrained surfaces. As to the means of
transport, they will not be so indispensible to movement. A new function
emerges to enlarge their original function: from being a tool for work
they become tools for play.


### Topography

Given the scale of social space in the sectorial network, and its
continuity, the space of rapid movement no longer coincides with the New
Babylonian way of life. The later is traversed by a slow and continuous
flux, displacement being but one of the forms of activity within the
sectors. But undoubtedly one would still seek to move rapidly from time to
time, by land for shorter distances, or by air. For air transport one can
imagine, on the terrace roofs, airplane runways and heliports. As to rapid
circulation on the ground, we have to imagine a road network as
independent as possible from the sector network. A multi-level lay-out
would guarantee the autonomy of networks and thoroughfares. The best
solution for decongesting the ground consists in raising the sectors on
pilotis, spaced as widely apart as possible. One advantage of this
construction is that it permits the arrangement of an unbroken sequence of
terrace roofs. In this way, a second open-air level is created, a second
artificial landscape above the natural landscape.

Given their huge size, the sector interiors depend on the system of
distribution of energy needed for lighting, ventilation and air
conditioning, but this 'dependency' implies a certain freedom: freedom
from the monotonous alteration of day and night, which humanity has sought
since the dawn of time.

Taken as a whole, New Babylon presents itself as a network of huge links,
the greater part of which are raised above the ground. On the ground, a
second network, traffic. The 'links' are areas generally devoid of
building, though with the exception of centers of production and the
installations that have no place in the sector social space, like, for
instance, transmitter antennae, and perhaps drilling rigs, historic
monuments, observatories and other facilities for scientific research.
Part of these vacant areas is given over to different working of the
ground itself and to rearing livestock; another part to nature reserves,
wooded parks. The network structure facilitates acess to these, the
intervening distances being each time relatively small.

The topographical surveying of New Babylon poses problems that cannot be
resolved by using the tradition means of cartography. Given, on the one
hand, its organization on many levels (ground, inside the sectorial
volume, terrace roofs), the connections between levels, the nature of
communications and the solutions of continuity created between the levels
can only emerge in maquette form. On the other hand, the structures are
anything but permanent. In effect it is more a question of a
micro-structure in continuous transformation, in which the time factor,
the fourth dimension, plays a considerable part. Consequently, any
three-dimensional representation would, in itself, only have the value of
a snapshot, since even admitting that the model of each sector may be
reduced to several planes and sections of the different levels, and that
one manages thereby to constitute a sort of detailed atlas of the sectors,
it would still be necessary, from one instant to the next, to record,
using symbolic notations as in a ship's log, all the topographical
modifications that are produced. Recourse to a computer will doubtless be
necessary to resolve such a complex problem.


### The sector

The sector is the smallest element, the basic unit of the New Babylonian
network, one of the 'links' in the chains that make it up. As one might
expect, its dimensions are markedly greater than the dimensions of the
elements (buildings) that make up the towns, such as they are known. The
scale of these elements depends on the system of social relations. In
rural communities where human relations and family ties are tightly
enmeshed, the basic element is the independent family residence. In
industrial towns, given the social character of production work,
relationships are established at school, in the place of work or leisure,
in political and other meetings -- which supplement family ties. Thus each
member of a family creates personal ties outside of it. Under these
conditions, larger residential units are seen to appear, blocks for many
families, sometimes equipped with communal services. But there, as in
rural communities, one is dealing with a sedentary population, a regular
way of life.

When the family group disintegrates and the division of time and space is
no longer socially determined by productive work, when one can decide the
place and duration of one's stay, the utlimate ties are broken. For all
that, the more or less lasting relations between people will not have
disappeared, but restrictive social relations will have been replaced by
more varied and changing emotional ties. More so than in stable
communities, the fluctuating society favors fortuitous contacts and
encounters.

The sector is a basic construction (macro-structure) in which an
environment is constructed. Qua support, the macro-structure must allow
the greatest freedom in the permanent construction (micro-structure) of
the interior space. In its simplest form, the sector incorporates a number
of superimposed horizontal spaces linked to each other and to the ground
by vertical elements, and one or more fixed nuclei for services. This
space could be taken up by a more complex structure resulting from the
articulation of variable smaller spaces. As an alternative to the support
structure, one can also imagine a 'floating' structure, a suspended sector
secured to one or more masts. Another possible alternative, the
self-bearing structure, requires a limited number of points of support,
which is an advantage, but, since the module and the dimensions of the
micro-structure depend more directly on the macro-structure, the
organization of interior space is no longer as free. The choice of one or
the other solution -- a sector on pilotis, or a suspended or self-bearing
sector -- also depends in certain measure on the geographical position.

The macro-structure, then, houses a moveable interior structure. Since the
dimensions of the sector are important, any demolition or transformation
of the basic structure is of necessity an ambitious undertaking. However,
the ludic life of the inhabitants of New Babylon presupposes frequent
transformation of the interior of the sectors. For this to take place
without problems, the containing structure would have to be as neutral as
possible, and, from the construction point of view, the variable contained
structure [would have to be] completely independent of the former.

The variable structure grows out of the moveable assembly systems (walls,
floors, terminals, bridges, etc.) light and therefore easy to transport,
which can be as easily mounted as dismounted, thus [making them]
re-usable. Any assembly project requires both the normalization of the
module and the standardization of production. The dimensions of the
macro-structure are determined by the module of standard elements. But
this does not mean, of course, limiting the possible combinations or
simplifying the forms, since a great number of standard assembly types and
systems can be combined in a multiplicity of ways.

With these few data, a schematic idea of the sector can be arrived at. It
is a mainly horizontal skeleton, extending over ten or twenty hectares at
some 15-20 meters above the ground: the total height is somewhere between
30 and 60 meters. Inside, one or more fixed nuclei contain a technical
center and a service center that is also a hotel reception center with
individual rooms. Some of the sectors are provided with sanitary and
teaching facilities, warehousing and distribution facilities for articles
of everyday use. Others, with libraries, scientific research centers and
anything else that may be necessary. The nuclei occupy a part of the
sector; the rest, the most important part of New Babylon, is a social
space with moveable articulations: the playground of Homo Ludens.

A volume with the span of a New Babylon sector is more independent of the
external world than a construction built on a smaller scale. Daylight, for
instance, only penetrates a few meters there, a large part of the interior
being artificially lit. The accumulation of solar heat and the loss of
heat in cold weather occur so slowly that the changes in ambient
temperature barely influence the temperature inside. The climatic
conditions (the intensity of lighting, temperature, the hygrometric state,
ventiliation) are all under technical control. Inside, a variable range of
climates can be created and modified at will. Climate becomes an important
element in the play of ambiance, all the more so since the technical
apparatus is accessible to everybody and the decentralization (of
distribution) encourages a certain autonomy of the sector or group of
sectors. Smaller centers are preferred to a single center, which
facilitates reproducing the most diverse climates and, why not, inventing
new ones as a contrast, changing the seasons, transforming them according
to an infinitely varied synchronization accorded to the metamorphosis of
space.

The audiovisual media will be used in the same spirit. The fluctuating
world of the sectors calls on facilities (a transmitting and receiving
network) that are both decentralized and public. Given the participation
of a large number of people in the transmission and reception of images
and sounds, perfected telecommunications become an important factor in
ludic social behavior.


The New babylonians
-------------------

### Creativity and agrressivity

They wander through the sectors of New Babylon seeking new experiences, as
yet unknown ambiances. Without the passivity of tourists, but fully aware
of the power they have to act upon the world, to transform it, recreate
it. They dispose of a whole arsenal of technical implements for doing
this, thanks to which they can make the desired changes without delay.
Just like the painter, who with a mere handful of colors creates an
infinite variety of forms, contrasts and styles, the New Babylonians can
endlessly vary their environment, renew and vary it by using their
technical implements. This comparison reveals a fundamental difference
between the two ways of creating. The painter is a solitary creator who is
only confronted by another person's reactions once the creative act is
over. Among the New Babylonians, on the other hand, the creative act is
also a social act: as a direct intervention in the social world, it
elicits an immediate response. The artist's individual creation seems, to
other's eyes, to escape all constraint and ripen in isolation. And it is
only much later, when the work acquires an undeniable reality, that it
will have to confront society. At any given moment in his creative
activity, the New Babylonian is himself in direct contact with his peers.
Each one of his acts is public, each one acts on a milieu which is also
that of the others and elicits spontaneous reactions. All action, then,
loses its individual character. On the other hand, each reaction can
provoke others in turn. In this way interventions form chain reactions
that only come to an end when a situation that has become critical
'explodes' and is transformed into another situation. The process escapes
one person's control, but it matters little knowing who set it off and by
whom it will be inflected in turn. In this sense the critical moment (the
climax) is an authentic collective creation. The yardstick, the space-time
framework, of the New Babylonian world is the rhythm in which each moment
suceeds the last.

From Homo Faber's point of view, New Babylon is an uncertain universe in
which the 'normal' man is at the mercy of every possible destructive
force, every kind of aggression. But let us note that 'normality' is a
concept linked to a certain historical practice; its content is therefore
variable. As for 'aggressivity,' psychoanlaysis has granted it
considerable importance, going so far as to define an 'instinct' of
aggression. The area of study thus found itself reduced to the man who
struggles for his existence, to the human being engaged in that immemorial
combat he, like other species, is still engaged in.

The image of a free man who does not have to struggle for his existence is
without historical basis. The instinct of self-defense has also been
postulated as the primordial instinct of the human being, and of all that
lives. And it is to that instinct that all the others are related.

Aggressivity is a manifestation of the will to power, which is the
attribute of a highly developed being (man) capable of foresight and who,
in a world in where his existence is threatened, can organize in time,
that is to say, according to a plan, a safe place for himself. For that
reason, man's aggressivity does not disappear with the satisfaction of his
immediate needs. It is, apparently, in the most industrialized, 'rich'
countries that aggressive behavior regresses the least, above all among
the propertied class. To shed light on this apparent contradiction between
material security and the persistence of aggressivity, it would perhaps be
necessary to admit the existence of an 'instinct' other than that of
self-defense: the creative instinct, which appears with the sublimation of
primordial instinct whenever material conditions are sufficiently
favorable for self-defense to be transformed into open spontaneity.

The objective impossibility of realizing a creative life within
utilitarian society, based on the suppression of creativity but
nevertheless containing all the conditions favorable to its development,
permits us to understand why aggressivity finds itself apart from the
struggle for existence. In contemporary society, the propertied class
itself cannot act in a creative manner, and it is easy to understand that
it feels more frustrated than the masses, who own nothing yet struggle for
their future freedom. The goal of these struggles being the transformation
of existing society, conflict itself is creation.


### The creative instinct

In speculating on the possible advent of a ludic society, one presupposes
from the beginning that every human being feels the latent need to
manifest his creativity, and that it appears in the sublimation of primary
instinctual forms. This need is not satisfied in our static society, where
its accomplishment through creation can only be potential. All education
that prepares the future adult for the 'useful' role he will play in
society tends to repress the creative instinct. However, it often comes
about that 'utility' disappears with the development of technology, even
before the child arrives at the end of his studies. Under these conditions
'education' can only play a negative role in the repression of all
spontaneous creativity. If this were not the case, the adult would be more
creative than the child, while in reality the opposite is true.

But can one conceive of an education aiming at the development of
creativity? It is permissible to doubt it and to ask oneself if all
education, or what is designated by that term, is not extremely limited,
if its principle function is not to restrain freedom, which is the
fundamental condition of creativity. The only education favorable to
creation is that which unfetters the development of creativity. But Homo
Ludens dispenses with education. He learns by playing.

Those who cannot adapt to the structures of utilitarian society condemn
themselves to isolation. These are the 'asocial' types, a term often
synonymous with 'criminal.' 'Criminality' presupposes transgression of
constituted social relations, which explains the different interpretations
of which it has been the object. Crime, 'the criminal act,' disturbs the
order of these reations and society reacts by eliminating the guilty
person. When, from a totally different perspective, 'the criminal act' is
considered as an expression of a frustrated will to power, and in
admitting that, sublimated, the will to power is transformed into
creativity, the 'crime' becomes no more than an abortive attempt at
creation. The attitude of the criminal vis-avis reality is no more passive
than the artist's, since he too intervenes in a given situation. But while
the creative act brings together destruction and construction, lending
them balance, the criminal privileges destruction. Yet the artist's
intervention displays, at least as regards utilitarian society, an
'asocial' attitude whose effect is barely distinguishable from that of the
crime.

In New Babylon, where no 'order' is respected, community life takes shape
within the dynamic of permanently changing situations. This dynamic
activates forces that in utilitarian are repressed or at best tolerated.
That is why it is unthinkable that a life like that in New babylon could
be imposed on contemporary society, even for the briefest length of time.
When social conventions are no longer respected, as during carnival, it is
not creativity that increases but aggressivity: an aggressivity directly
proportional to the pressure exerted on creativity by the society.

Every reason for aggressivity has been eliminated in New Babylon. The
conditions of life favor sublimation, and activity becomes creation. This
superior form of existence is only possible in a world of total freedom
where the human being no longer struggles to maintain a certain level, but
concentrates his activity on the permanent creation of his life, which he
directs toward an even higher level.


### The New Babylonian

The struggle for subsistence has divided humanity into interest groups
that are often competing but always opposed to the idea of joining
together in large groups, harder to defend. The prolonged division into
races, tribes, nations, social classes is also explained by the historical
conditions of this struggle. In a society that no longer knows the
struggle for subsistence, competition disappears at both the individual
and group level. Barriers and frontiers also disappear. The way is open to
the intermxing of populations, which results in both the disappearance of
racial differences and the fusion of populations into a new race, the
world-wide race of New babylonians.

The New Babylonian disposes of a complete freedom of action, but this
liberty is only actualized in relations of reciprocity with all of his
peers. A ludic society based on the community of interests of all human
beings knows none of the individual or collective conflicts that
characterize utilitarian society. Conflict of interest, competition and
exploitation are, in this context, notions devoid of content. The New
Babylonian community comprises the totality of the inhabitants of New
Babylon, and it is their simultaneous activity that creates the new
collective culture.

Even when he covers enormous distances, Homo Faber moves in a social space
limited by the obligations to return to a fixed abode. He is 'tied to the
land.' His social relations define his social space, which includes his
home, place of work, the home of his family and of his friends. The New
Babylonian escapes these constraining ties. His social space is unlimited.
Because he is no longer 'rooted' he can circulate freely: much more freely
since the space he traverses endlessly changes space and atmosphere with
the result that it is constantly renewed. Mobility, and the disorientation
it produces, facilitates contacts between people. Ties are made and unmade
without any difficulty, endowing social relations with a perfect openness.


On some elements of New Babylonian culture
------------------------------------------

The essence of New Babylonian culture is playing with the elements that
make up the environment. Such play is possible due to the integral
technical control of all those elements, which thus become a conscious
creation of the environment.

The components of the environment are numerous and of different kinds. In
order to imagine them in all their diversity, it would be necessary to
begin by distinguishing several groups, proceeding from two separate
criteria: an objective criterion and a subjective criterion.

A. Elements of spatial construction, which determine its appearance and
are the object of prior planning. They can be grouped within the category
of 'architectural elements.' (Examples: the form and dimensions of space,
the building materials, their structure, their colors);
B. Elements defining the quality of space. Being more malleable, they
cannot be planned to the same extent. These are the 'climatic conditions'
(temperature, humidity, atmosphere, etc.);
C. Elements that, without deciding the quality of space, influence the
perception of space. Their utilization is aleatory and their effect of
brief duration. These are 'psychological elements.' (Examples: movement,
eating and drinking, the use of verbal or other communication, etc.).
Another classification, using more subjective criteria, distributes the
environmental elements according to the influence they exert on us. Here
one discerns visual, sonorous, tactile, olfactory and gustatory elements.

But whatever the criteria, it is difficult to isolate an element, to
separate it from the rest. And a great number of important elements can
form part of many different categories. Thus, among the elements chosen
according to the first criterion, the structure of space is linked to
climatic conditions as well as to movements in space. The pleasure taken
in eating and drinking is not the same in every space, whatever the
climate. As to the second criterion, it enables us to discover even more
complex associations. A structure, for instance, can be perceived by the
sight and by the touch; language is addressed equally to the hearing and
to sight. Food and drink to taste, but also to smell, to sight, to the
touch. To these elements others are added, acting one on the other in
close interdependence. Dissociative analysis is only justified from the
viewpoint of technical control. Being sensitive to an environment, to an
atmosphere, one does not imagine distinguishing between the elements that
make it up, just as when looking at a painting one does not separate out
the different materials used by the painter.


### Forms of behavior

It is well known that behavior is strongly influenced by environmental
elements. In psychiatry the manipulation of these elements is called
'brain-washing.' In New Babylon, where each person can freely use the
technical apparatus and actively participate in the collective
organization of space, these elements cannot be chosen according to a
pre-established goal. Any initiative in one direction or another can, at
any moment, be detourned by different, even opposed initiatives.

If the New Babylonian can transform the environment and the ambiance by
using the available technical material, if in so doing he can temporarily
influence the behavior of others, he in turn undergoes their influence. In
any event, the effect of his intervention does not last long, since being
a provocation each intervention cannot remain without response.

An objection could be raised, creativity not being the same for all, that
the influence of the most active and gifted will be stronger than that of
the less energetic and inventive. This objection, however, is
characteristic of a utilitarian mentality, which sees in the superiority
of intelligence and energy the surest means of acceding to power. In a
collective culture, the individual act intermingles with general social
activity. It cannot be isolated and the result bears no trace of this.
Collective culture is a composite culture, a product of the close and
organic interdependence of all creative activity. It is the contrary of
the competitive culture we know, which takes the absolute superiority of
the strongest, of 'genius,' as the unit by which to measure all activity
-- which results in an unparalleled waste of creative energies.

Let's imagine, then, that at a given moment X number of individuals find
themselves inside one of the sectors. That the sector is divided into many
spaces of different size, form and atmosphere. That each of these spaces
is at the point of being transformed: being built, destroyed, mounted,
dismounted. . . . That all the individuals present actively participate in
this incessant activity. That each person can circulate freely from one
space to another. That the sector is being crossed incessantly from one
part to another by new people and by those who, after having stayed there
awhile, leave. Such mobile complexity of both the spatial conditions and
the composition of the 'population' determines New Babylonian culture.

The sectors constantly change form and atmosphere according to the
activities that are taking place there. Nobody can return to what was
before, rediscover the place as he left it, the image he'd retained in his
memory. Nobody now falls into the trap of habit.

Habits, the totality of which constitute a social 'model of behavior,' are
what, in utilitarian society, privilege a static way of life: they re so
many automatisms. However, the dynamism of a life of permanent creation
excludes all automatism. Just as an artist cannot and does not want to
repeat one of his works, so the New Babylonian who creates his life cannot
exhibit repetitive behavior.


### The dynamic labyrinth

While in utilitarian society one strives by every means towards an optimal
orientation in space, the guarantee of temporal efficiency and economy, in
New Babylon the disorientation that furthers adventure, play and creative
change is privileged. The space of New Babylon has all the characteristics
of a labyrinthine space, within which movement no longer submits to the
constraints of given spatial or temporal organization. The labyrinthine
form of New Babylonian social space is the direct expression of social
independence.

The ambiance of an environment possessing certain specific plastic and
acoustic characteristics depends on the individuals who find themselves
there. A single individual can passively submit to this ambiance or change
it according to his mood at the time. But with the entrance of a second
person, a new presence is felt and the interaction of the two presences
excludes any passivity. The quality of the environment and its ambiance no
longer depends on material factors alone, but on the manner in which they
will have been perceived, appreciated and used, on the 'new way of
looking' at them. And when a third or fourth person comes to take his
place alongside the others, the situation -- being more complex -- escapes
the control of any of the people present. As the number of visitors
gradually increases and the composition of the group alters, complexity
also increases, while the individual control of space decreases.

The collective use of space entails qualitative change since it tends to
reduce passivity. The activity of the occupants of a space is an integral
part of the ambiance that, being static, becomes dynamic. In a social
space where the number of individuals is ceaselessly changing, along with
the relations between them, each and every person is prompted to change
his personal ambiance. All these impulses, brought together, represent a
force that manifestly acts on the ordering of space, and in New Babylon,
where space is public, it acts continuously. Space in its entirety will
thus submit to the most unexpected influences, and one can imagine that a
similar process unfolds simultaneously in infinitely diverse ways in a
multitude of spaces, whose number is as variable as the links created
between them. One arrives, then, at the image of an immense social space
that is forever other: a dynamic labyrinth in the widest sense of the term.


### Technology

Technology is the indispensable tool for realizing an experimental
collectivism. To seek to dominate nature without the help of technique is
pure fiction. As is collective creation without the appropriate means of
communication. A renewed, reinvented audiovisual media is an indispensable
aid. In a fluctuating community, without a fixed base, contacts can only
be maintained by intensive telecommunications. Each sector will be
provided with the latest equipment, accessible to everyone, whose use, we
should note, is never strictly functional. In New Babylon air conditioning
does not only serve to recreate, as in utilitarian society, an 'ideal'
climate, but to vary ambiance to the greatest possible degree. As for
telecommunications, it does not only, or principally, serve interests of a
practical kind. It is at the service of ludic activity, it is a form of
play.

In order to grasp this, let us take the example of a local cafe, a very
quiet cafe whose atmosphere would suddenly become animated when some new
arrival puts money in the jukebox. In New Babylon, each person can at any
moment, in any place, alter the ambiance by adjusting the sound volume,
the brightness of the light, the olfactive ambiance or the temperature.
Should a small group enter a space, then the ordering of that space can
become something else. By articulating many small spaces, one can create a
space of more ample dimensions, or vice versa. One can also change the
form of a space with new entrances, or by blocking the old ones; by adding
or removing stairs, bridges, ladders, ramps, etc. With a minimum of
effort, one can arrive at any desired modification. Moreover, one has at
hand a varied range of partitions of different materials, textures and
colors; different too in their thermo-acoustic qualities. The stairs,
bridges and pipes are themselves of varied construction and form. Through
the combination of irregular, barely practicable surfaces, of smooth
ramps, narrow passages, acute angles, etc., certain spaces become
selective. This would be the case with those one gets to by a rope ladder
or pole, and which will be the favorite places of children and young
people. The marginal sectors, which perch on the side of a mountain or
along the coastline and which are, given their situation, less frequented,
will be the preferred choice of retired or sick people.

The sectors must be as independent as possible from the viewpoint of their
construction and their technical facilities. This is important, since any
sector must be able to be reconstructed without damage to the neighboring
sectors to which it is linked by mobile bridges. The large electric or
nuclear power stations that supply the sectors are sited, of course, as
far as possible from the network.

### The intensification of space

In New Babylon, where the nature and structure of space changes
frequently, one will make much more intensive use of global space. The
volume of social space and of social activity in space has two
consequences: the space available for individual use is greater than in a
society with a sedentary population; yet there is no more empty space,
space unused even for a brief time, and, as one makes creative use of it,
its aspect changes so much and so often that a relatively small surface
offers as many variations as a trip around the world. Distance covered,
speed, are no longer the yardsticks of movement; and space, lived more
intensely, seem to dilate. But this intensification of space is only
possible due to the creative use of technical means -- a use that we, who
live in a society where use has a finality, can hardly imagine.

To succeed in life is to create and re-create it incessantly. Man can only
have a life worthy of himself if he himself creates. When the struggle for
existence is no more than a memory, he will be able, for the first time in
history, to freely dispose of the whole of his life. He will be able, in
complete freedom, to give his existence the form of his desires. Far from
remaining passive toward a world in which he is content to adapt himself,
for better or worse, to external circumstances, he would aspire to
creating another one in which his liberty is realized. In order that he
may create his life, it is incumbent on him to create that world. And that
creation, like the other, entails the same uninterrupted succession of
re-creations.

New Babylon is the work of the New Babylonians alone, the product of their
culture. For us, it is only a model of reflection and play.

(Written by Constant, for the exhibition catalogue published by the Haags
Gemeetenmuseum, The Hague, 1974.)


% To Contact NOT BORED!:
% Info@notbored.org
% ISSN 1084-7340.
% Snail mail: POB 1115, Stuyvesant Station, New York City 10009-9998



