% .MDSH IS MARKDOWN +X -> http://freeze.sh/2015/mdsh
%
% lines starting with % are comments and therefore will be ignored
% BUT: A COMMENT MAY BE FUNCTIONAL (= interpreted during export)
% A text [^]{a footnote} and some more text
% A citation reference [@fsf:2007:gpl]
% A citation reference with pagenumber [@[1-8]kay:1990:uiapv]
% -> bibtex references: http://freeze.sh/etherpad/bibref
% -> markdown reference: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown

% --------------------------------------------------------------------------- %

% http://forkable.eu/utils/texts/goto10.org/FLOSS+Art.v1.1.eBook-GOTO10/
% http://ospublish.constantvzw.org/documents/FLOSS+Art.pdf



% TITLE: Appropriation and Type -- Before and Today
%        ------------------------------------------
% BY: Ricardo Lafuente
% INFO: http://lfkn.de/mzlm
% LICENSE: GPL (2.0) / GFDL (1.2) / FAL (1.3)



Appropriation has been a recurring and accepted strategy in defining
typography as an activity and a business. We can pinpoint four cases
where appropriation has been key in defining landmarks in the history of
type, not only aiding the breaking of technical and creative boundaries
but also helping to question legal and moral ones.

A brief analysis of the current situation in typography will follow,
focusing on the approach to the subject by corporations, users and
designers. The current business model (digital foundries, font files
with copyrights) is, as we'll argue, a remnant of a time where a
typeface filled a whole drawer and fails to account for the necessary
changes that the information age demands.

Finally, we'll conclude with the definition of an essentially
contradictory business model that has a very strong stance against "font
forging" and copyright issues, although it has historically -- and now,
more than ever -- thrived on constant, and often uncredited,
appropriation of ideas and designs.


Appropriation in Type through History
=====================================

We could certainly identify many more instances of inspiration or
downright copying of ideas in typography, but these four cases will
suffice to demonstrate the different uses of copy, inspiration and
appropriation in general. Our focus here will be on the issue of
creative appropriation (inspiration) on one hand, and corporate business
models and copyright issues (plagiarism) on the other.


The Gutenberg Press
===================

In 1450, Johannes Gutenberg produced the first commercially viable model
of his printing press, which was widely used for centuries until the
advent of the Linotype machine, the first way to automate, though only
partially, the type setting and printing process. Gutenberg's press was
the result of the combination of five key methods and processes, three,
possibly four, of which were not original:

-   The screw press, which was already used by the Greeks and Romans to
    process olive oil and wine.
-   Block printing, present in China since 594 AD. Gutenberg's
    innovation was to use metal cast types (instead of the Chinese
    traditional woodblock printing technique), although metal
    typecasting was already developed in Korea around 1230 AD.
-   Letter punches, which were a goldsmithing technique -- Gutenberg
    was a goldsmith -- used to engrave letters in metal pieces.
-   Letter replica casting, a method to quickly create new individual
    characters, along with a particular metal alloy that made for
    durable pieces. This method has been attributed to Gutenberg but
    recent studies shed doubts on this fact.
-   Metal-adherent ink, devised by Gutenberg.

This shows that originality, in a time before copyrights and patents
existed, is not a straightforward issue. It was not before 1700 that the
first copyright statute appeared in Britain -- the protection of ideas
could have changed the fate of this invention and the combination of
methods made. The point here is that they were combined in a way that
made typography as we know it possible, and there seems to be absolutely
no question regarding the legitimacy of this invention made possible by
appropriating previous methods and processes. Gutenberg's model of
printing stood firm for centuries until the Linotype machine introduced
partial automation of the printing process.


Stanley Morison and Monotype
============================

In 1886, the Linotype machine began to be produced by the Mergenthaler
Printing Co. in the United States. This machine revolutionised the
printing process by introducing a degree of automation, allowing for
quick composition of lines of text. It wouldn't take long (a year) for
Lanston Monotype to begin production of their own fully automated
typesetting machine, devised by Tolbert Lanston, which could typeset
whole pages from a mechanical keyboard input.

In 1922, Stanley Morison was appointed as typographic advisor of the
Monotype Corporation (the British branch of the Philadephia company), a
post he would keep until 1967. The Monotype Corporation built an
extensive catalogue of cuts made by Morison from classic references,
such as Bodoni, Bembo, Baskerville, and several others. These revivals
helped bring general interest to the old masters' works They were also
a key marketing strategy to try to push up the value of the Monotype
machine -- the faces available would definitely determine the decision of
a buyer who fancies a particular style, and thus the Monotype
Corporation had no qualms about recruiting all the classics, which were
by then in the public domain.

It is tremendously unfair, though, to portray Morison as a hijacker -- he
was one of the hallmarks of 20th century type, being responsible for the
creation of the Times typeface and hugely influencing the field of
typography to the present day through the efforts he dedicated to
bringing the classics to the general public -- legitimately appropriating
other designs. Without Morison's endeavour, our legacy would no doubt be
poorer today.


Arial, Monotype and Microsoft
=============================

1982 is the year in which the Arial typeface was released by Monotype
Typography, Monotype Corporation's type design division. Designed by
Robin Nicholas and Patricia Saunders, this typeface had a remarkable
impact. Not only does it have obvious similarities to other modern sans
serifs (sharing features with Helvetica, Univers and Akzidenz Grotesk),
it exactly mirrors the glyph width tables from Helvetica, which is the
data included in a font file that describes each character's dimensions
-- an exact match that gives little chance of coincidence.

Microsoft licensed Arial from Monotype instead of the more expensive
Helvetica, and in 1990 it was bundled with Microsoft Windows 3.1. It has
been a staple of Windows systems until today. This is a specific case
where a typeface was chosen not for its genuine creative and/or
practical value but based upon external reasons, in this case driven by
financial motives. Type designers are almost unanimous in shunning
Arial as a lesser typeface: it is notably absent from Robert Bringhurst's
typeface selection in _The Elements of Typographic Style_ (the current all
round reference on type design from the designer's perspective), and is
also only mentioned as a passing remark on Robin Nicholas's entry on the
typographic encyclopaedic survey by Friedl et 
al.[@[p.409]friedletal:1998:tdth] This is pretty much a clear
indication of type designers' consensus on the Arial issue; it's also
worth noting that there has been, to date, no attempt to replace Arial
as a standard font in operating systems.[^]{Arial is now a "standard"
font of web typography, being part of a very limited set of fonts that
most browsers can read.}
In strict law and copyright terms, it's appropriate to compare the Arial
case to a cheating student who argues that the fact that his exam has
exact passages from his nearest classmates' exams owes to coincidence.
It is equally reasonable to argue that borrowing from three sources
rather than just one does not make the situation more acceptable.

So Arial stands in mixed principles: the type community is almost
unanimous in calling shenanigans, but it has still made its way into our
current operating systems despite that fact -- it didn't face any legal
actions as of 2008.


Segoe
=====

In early 2006, Microsoft announced a significant effort to dignify type
design in their upcoming Vista operating system: six type designers --
Lucas de Groot and Robin Nicholas figuring among them -- were
commissioned to design appropriate typefaces for screen and print. The
result was six very attractive fonts that not only could appeal to
general uses by less savvy people for simple word processing tasks, but
also suit the type designers' fancy.

Another font included in Vista is Segoe, a revival of Frutiger Next
(which in turn is a revival of Frutiger) that Microsoft licensed from
Monotype and altered. It's not the first case in which Adrian Frutiger's
work has been remade, Adobe's Myriad and Apple's Podium Sans also bear a
striking resemblance to Frutiger's structure. When Microsoft registered
Segoe in Europe in 2004, Linotype sued for copyright infringement since
European law, unlike the American one, recognises the rights to font
designs (although patent law is often used to circumvent this legal void
in the U.S.).

The most significant fact is that Microsoft based their defence not on
the issue of originality -- stating the differences between Segoe and
Frutiger Next, but on the fact that Linotype wasn't selling its typeface
in Europe when the request was filed. This situation could very well be
interpreted as an admission by Microsoft's part that the font in fact
owes credit to Frutiger's design.

This case becomes all more revealing in that it is both a high profile
and current example of an attempt to settle the authenticity of a type
design in courts. Unlike Arial, it didn't sneak past the critics and
found serious hurdles while Microsoft tried to implement it in its
Windows OS. The EU ended up rejecting Segoe's application, prompting the
release of a modified version that bore less resemblance to the Frutiger
typeface. The plaintiff, Linotype, was acquired by Monotype Imaging -- 
the designers of Segoe -- in 2006.


The Digital Typography Paradigm
===============================

Typography, and type design in particular, is historically defined by a
constant recursion of past themes and trends, be it as inspiration,
revivals, or as a way to question them -- as in postmodern type examples,
such as Emigre's or David Carson's work. Nevertheless, modern designs
still owe heavily (with or without credit) to a tradition of arts and
crafts spanning five centuries.

Meanwhile, during the last two decades, the type world hasn't ceased
discussing the issue of rights and plagiarism, a discussion that was
sparked by the digital revolution and the introduction of the personal
computer as an all purpose design and production tool. This shift
implied that the tools used in typography and book production ceased to
be the sole domain of type makers, printers and book publishers -- the
only ones who could afford the initial investment of a type foundry,
workshop or printing press and manage it effectively. Designing type
soon became cheaper and cheaper, as the physical and financial burden of
the new tools gradually became less and less significant. Nowadays, a
computer and a printer can do in minutes what a huge phototypesetting
equipment would have taken a lot of time, effort and money to produce
ten years ago.

The key effect of the digital revolution in type design is that
typefaces became fonts -- a radical change in that they were no more lead
blocks but data -- files that describe how each glyph should be drawn on
screen or on a printer. A free software solution to type design,
FontForge, was released in 2004, doing away with any software costs
involved in font creation and editing, meaning the only overhead for a
type design business would be a PC, paper, drawing tools, an image
capture device (scanner or camera) and eventually an internet
connection. This change has serious repercussions in the whole
typography market: now type design wouldn't, in theory, require any kind
of intermediaries between the typographer/designer and its audience.
Reality developed otherwise, as we will see from three standpoints in
typography usage and creation.


Corporate Type
==============

The digital revolution made a deep redefinition of most areas of study
possible. We will show, though, that the field of typography has been
lagging behind when it comes to taking advantage of the digital medium.
Moreover, the corporate business model has failed to account for the
specific needs and features of information technology, sticking to an
artificial market sustained by an inflated value attributed to digital
files as if they still were physical objects that are owned.

Nowadays, there are three major players in the type business:
Microsoft, Adobe and Monotype Imaging.

Apple Computer hasn't been a key figure in the type market
(concentrating on developing font technology for its operating system),
but it had an essential role in developing the actual playing field.
Apple heralded the personal computer era in with their original
Macintosh and has intermittently collaborated and competed with
Microsoft and Adobe, being responsible for the development of the
TrueType font format along with Microsoft as a response to Adobe's
expensively priced PostScript Type I font description format. The
release of TrueType in 1991 forced Adobe to gradually reduce prices and
eventually follow suit, releasing the PostScript specifications so that
software developers could implement it in their programs without
limitations.

Adobe Systems Inc., besides being responsible for a highly successful
suite of imaging and DTP software, has a very strong position in the
type market: not only is it a type vendor (through its typography
division, Adobe Type) but also the most influential company in the sense
that it owns most digital design solutions, especially after acquiring
its main rival Macromedia in April 2005 and facing no significant
competition in its market.

Microsoft is responsible for creating the most widely used operating
system in personal computers, as well as the most popular office suite.
Along with Adobe, Microsoft developed the currently dominant OpenType
file format, which is freely available to developers as long as they
agree to its rather restrictive licensing terms. Adobe converted its
entire type collection to OpenType in a move to spread the new standard.

Monotype Imaging is now a distant remnant of Tolbert Lanston's original
creation. It has adjusted technical breakthroughs in the 20th century
and claimed a staunch position in today's digital type market. It was
acquired by Agfa in 1999 forming Agfa Monotype, which in turn was
acquired by T. A. Associates, a North American investment firm, changing
its name to Monotype Imaging and developing a position in font software
and rendering engines. It also secured a strong standpoint in the font
vendor market after acquiring its rival Linotype, along with the rights
to their entire type collection.


User Type
=========

Most people get introduced to digital type by means of text editors. The
digital revolution would be the perfect reason to finally open
typography to everyone and make it a mainstream subject instead of a
limited access craft. Things have happened otherwise, though, and the
inability to create a suitable interface for allowing basic
experimentation with type has severely crippled the possibilities of the
new medium.

The font selection paradigm has changed little during the years,
offering a whole collection of typefaces in a drop down menu. Such is
the immediateness of digital type: It's just there, no need to open
drawers with thousands of lead characters. Users are encouraged, by
means of a simple GUI, to just pick their font and get to work on their
document. Even more: you don't even need to choose, just stick with the
default choice the software maker has made for you. Word processing
interfaces also assume the user doesn't want to be bothered with layout
choices such as margins, structure -- and they also make the choice for
us (incidentally, they also made it quite awkward to change these
defaults). In short: the standard word processing interface tells users
not bother to with type.

This paradigm helps to build the general perception that a font is a
finished, shrinkwrapped and untouchable product -- pretty much like
pre-packaged software. Although font files can be opened and edited as
long as we have an appropriate editor, most typeface editors are either
crude or catering exclusively to the type designer market. The user
usually isn't able to reach the underpinnings and intricacies of type,
instead being expected just to understand that the default template is
more than enough.

Such an approach to software designing effectively discourages any kind
of interest in typographic issues by the general public, and helps to
fuel the thought that fonts are "just there". It's worth noting that
there is still no easy and streamlined way to buy, install and use
fonts, unlike most other digital markets -- iTunes would be a good
example of that kind of market strategy. There's an obvious reluctance
to develop alternative business models for type design.


Designer Type
=============

The type designer community is centred on the study of classical and
modern examples and making attempts to postulate theory and practical
guidelines for the craft of type design, sitting somewhere between the
methods of architecture and those of poetry.

Fred Smeijers, a highly regarded Dutch type designer, analyses the type
designer's duty quite straightforwardly in his manifesto Type Now. On
the issue of the responsibilities of type designers and commitment to
specific guidelines, he states that

> a type designer cannot escape this responsibility of judgement (...).
> In the end, people -- the society -- either accept it or they don't
> [@[p.25]smeijers:2003:tn]

Society, it seems, would be the ultimate judge of whether a typeface is
a hallmark of craft or doomed to failure.

On the other hand, we find a curious account on Smeijers's description
on Fontana, a typeface by Ruben Fontana inspired by Meta: he describes
it as "uncomplicated", "_tres sympathique_", "sunny" and "open
minded".[@[p.40]smeijers:2003:tn] This certainly sounds more like a
description of a person or a song than of an object, and indeed sheds
some doubt on the much touted objectiveness of good type design. It
seems impossible to find serious and objective terms to classify a
typeface's features. Historical categorisations of design tendencies
vary from author to author, and although there are some widely used
terms to describe historical periods and typeface features, such as
"transitional type" or "slab serifs", there's a tendency to borrow from
poetry and music to identify a type family's "soul" (which, though
relevant from an artist or a historical point of view, is rather
unscientific).

This is not a contradiction, though, since we can distinguish between
type as a creative activity (in which there would be no problem with
this kind of analogy) and type as an industry and commodity (where
profit, market tendency, shareholder demands and legal requirements
imply that things have a definite value and purpose). Naturally,
Smeijers's interest is in the craft and art of typography, and not the
market and the economic relationships that it spawns. On the other hand,
our interest is definitely that which Smeijers doesn't care for.

We must assert that defending the status of type as a functional
solution to practical problems requires an objective set of rules that
derive from the way we read and write. We cannot yet account for matters
of objective legibility while we do not possess all information on our
mental processes and the mechanisms in the brain involved in acquiring
and processing written information -- this is the responsibility of
cognitive psychology and neuroscience.

We know, from history, that a text with generous line spacing will
certainly read better than other with no line spacing at all. The German
blackletter used by Gutenberg in his Bible, however, is almost
unreadable to a contemporary westerner's eyes and definitely alien to
someone from a non-Western background. In the fifteenth century, though,
it was certainly the norm. History can help to avoid repeating our
mistakes, but it also shows the relative importance of our current
standards. In short, we still cannot objectively define type, and won't
be able to before a major breakthrough in neural science. However,
copyright issues and legal matters impose formal specifications on what
a font is and what it is not. Whether a typeface is a tweak, a revival
or a work of art is left to the courts.


Tweaking and Reviving
=====================

In order to explain the type designer's first reluctance to embrace the
digital alternative, and also to understand how design processes are not
as straightforward as they are presented to us, we'll concentrate on
Fred Smeijers's account on the current state of events in typography.
Specifically, we'll borrow his term font
tweaking.[@[p.32]smeijers:2003:tn] This process consists of loading
a font, "tweaking" it -- altering small details -- and releasing it with
different names, thereby circumventing copyright laws, since U.S. Law
protects font names as trademarks, but not font designs. Smeijers is
clear in pointing that font tweakers have nothing to do with type design
at all, reinforcing the distinction between doing type as a labour of
love and doing it for a profit.

Font revivals, on the other hand, are reinterpretations of existing
designs, and our best example would be Morison's effort in bringing the
classical designs into the Monotype type library. Revivals matter to us
because they aren't original productions (as they draw inspiration from
existing designs) but aren't copies either (because no rights over them
could be warranted otherwise, since there would be no original idea).

Digital type foundries and vendors still maintain the tradition,
digitising and redoing the old masters' work. It's worth noting that
even if a certain typeface, such as those with expired copyrights,
resides in the public domain, anyone can make a digital version -- a
revival -- and claim the rights to it.

Digital type catalogues are rife with revivals: In Bringhurst's
inventory of digital foundries, we can find 14 that issue revivals, and
4 that only release original designs.[@[p.309]bringhurst:2002:ets]
This interest in resuscitating previous designs also has motives that
stand apart from simple typographic archaeology. Revivals are routinely
issued by vendors and foundries to protect the rights of the rights
holder when a typeface's copyright is about to expire. Such is the case
with Avenir LT, Adobe Garamond and Frutiger Next -- which is what allowed
Linotype to retain the rights to the original design and be able to sue
Microsoft in the Segoe case.

Revivals reside in a kind of legal no man's land -- some, like Arial
(which is more a tweak than a declared revival), manage to stick around
while others, like Segoe, raise copyright lawyers' eyebrows.

Given these two aspects, one cannot but wonder that a type designer
wouldn't be thrilled with this perspective. One has also to question why
there is such a rift in reactions between font tweaking and font
revivals, which can be interpreted as no more than corporate font
tweaking. A practical example of this is MyFonts.com's description of
the Avenir LT font 
% (link, down the page) 
-- a "recut version of Avenir",
stating that "The 'LT' was added to the name as the metrics differ from
the original version". This definitely corresponds to Smeijer's
description of font tweaking, despite the fact that the name change
wasn't intended to avoid legal troubles, but to assert the brand of the
author of the revival. What is a revival, then, other than a corporate
sanctioned font tweak?


Free software and Type Design
=============================

So far, we've kept our focus on corporate approaches to type design. As
of 2008, the digital design tools field is dominated by Adobe Systems
Inc. with its Creative Suite bundle of applications targeting photo,
video, vector and sound editing. Adding to that the fact that Adobe
software is the staple in most design courses in Europe and the United
States, it can be stated that we are, indeed, faced with stifled
possibilities when choosing digital creative tools, a monoculture of
sorts. Although there have been parallel efforts from the free software
and open source world to create alternatives, Adobe's sole dominance in
this market remains unquestioned.

Going back to type design, we could point Donald Knuth's TeX and Metafont
as the best examples of an alternative approach to designing type on computers.

Having come from the UNIX crowd, and hailed as one of its most highly
regarded representatives, Donald E. Knuth reflected this background in
his efforts to create a simple system for dynamic typesetting. TeX was
first released in 1989, with several new versions being introduced
during the '90; its most recent update was released on 2002. It is still
very popular among the academic and scientist audience for typesetting
papers, since TeX excels at accurately setting and displaying
mathematical formulae and including them in book layouts.

For an Adobe software user, TeX will definitely look alien, not least
because of its lack of a graphical user interface, instead relying on
command line input for operating. Instead of the mainstream point and
click, drag and drop way of laying out and manipulating text and image
boxes, TeX is meant for processing specifically crafted plaintext files,
in turn outputting a printer-ready, typeset document. While requiring a
rather steep learning curve, TeX introduced a model of digital
typesetting that would be mostly put aside by the software houses that
produced GUI page layout editors.

Metafont was designed to be the font handling backend for TeX. It is
based on a modular method of generating letterforms, based on
instructions fed to the Metafont processor, which outputs valid font
files for use in TeX documents. Computer Modern, the hallmark font of
TeX, was created by Knuth using Metafont, and sports variable parameter
such as stroke thickness, serif dimensions and shape contrast. Thus, by
tweaking the parameters, one could create endless variations on letterforms,
treating them as data to be manipulated, in contrast with the commercial
model of fonts as unique authored pieces.

Due to its lack of a GUI -- an absence that a seasoned hacker would see
as a good feature -- TeX and Metafont presented little appeal for business
opportunities. As such, these two programs remain largely unknown to the
non-computer scientist audience since, among other reasons, you won't
easily find a book introducing TeX as you would a book on Adobe
InDesign.

Still, the Metafont model can be the foundation of a new model of regarding
typography and type design. Because of its simple input/output
architecture, it is only missing a proper interface for easy operation,
along with compatibility with existing formats. Other projects, such as
MetaType1 or LiveType -- not the Apple product, but a parametric approach
to typeface construction, presented in 1997 at SIGGRAPH -- show that a
modular, open-ended approach to fonts is possible and has definite
advantages over the manual creation process that's the norm in
applications such as Fontographer, FontLab or its comprehensive free
software alternative, Fontforge.


Technology on Arcane Standards
==============================

The current terminology used in typography is also a clear signal of how
it still depends on former traditions instead of adapting to its new
medium. Digital typography's rules and terminology have been determined
by its physical counterparts, and that still hasn't changed. For
example, we still talk about "leading" -- a term for the spacing between
lines that takes its name from the lead strips used for that purpose --
although the term "line spacing" is gradually replacing it in user
oriented applications such as Microsoft Word.

Another example -- while type foundries got that name because of their
heavy use of metal, single person studios with Macs are still referred
to as "foundries". And fonts are described as being "cut" or "cast",
more than "digitised". We talk about "digital versions" instead of
digital copies, perhaps to preserve their history and soul and not treat
them as just another file in a user's computer.

Although we can forgive this persistence in using traditional
typesetting terms, it also is a symptom that the type activity and
business have failed to redefine themselves for the digital medium. On
the other hand, these examples can actually be interpreted as quite an
artificial and linguistic way to value the work of the typographer,
probably with the aim of distinguishing between "true" type designers
and mere font tweakers, and not let "true" typography be contaminated by
the creeping tweaker threat.


What Now?
=========

Given that digital type has been hanging around for thirty years, the
progress in improving on font technology and taking advantage of the
digital medium has been rather low. On the other hand, type designers in
general (with the exception of rare cases such as Emigre or Letterror)
have not tried to get to grips with font technology, rather limiting
themselves to drawing and tracing their designs in Fontographer and
selling them on major font vendors (MyFonts, Monotype) or independent
ones (such as T26 and Veer). Worse still, issues of originality and
plagiarism have been discussed in type design circles, but corporate
entities break them routinely while trying, at the same time, to assert
their rights in courts.

The difference between major and minor vendors is not substantial:
though distributors like Veer try to create a community and improve on
the users' and designers' experience through research, designer
spotlights and support. Despite these efforts, digital typefaces are
still regarded in an esoteric limbo between metal characters and
abstract data. And though the price tags have steadily declined (and
recently stabilised around the 20 dollar range in general), it is
revealing that despite business models such as iTunes or Flickr,
collaborative methods in producing typefaces (many typographers are
still lone workers) haven't yet developed, and file formats have changed
so little in the face of recent, sleeker solutions like XML and SVG.
There's little hope for innovation: the Adobe-Macromedia and
Monotype-Linotype mergers have paved the ground for a corporate
monoculture ruled by software and typeface vendors and distributors,
with very little margin for competition.

We can also point a mutual apathy between commercial developers and
designers as a possible reason -- type designers try to adapt to outdated
ways -- file formats and type tools -- to create their works, while
developers lag in keeping up to date to new breakthroughs. Limiting the
tools is limiting the imagination.

On the other hand, font vendors have an incredibly contradictory stance
regarding font rights, using copyright law to protect their products
while violating it to borrow from others'. The different fate of Arial
and Segoe begs the question: are the vendors and distributors handling
this as it should be handled?

This model's obvious contradictions definitely invite serious
questioning as to the legitimacy and validity of the current type market
and business model, which cannot effectively release its standards and
technology because of the threat of competition. It is therefore left to
users, designers and independent developers to shape a new way of
defining type and creating effective communication channels between
providers and users, be it through online communities or real world
discussion in type designer's circles and colleges.

If type design takes the free/open source route -- and the wheels are
already in motion -- how can type vendors sustain their profit margins
and their markets? With open fonts and free font editing software
around, there would be little doubt that typography can take a very
interesting turn. Could we also see the open approach and the business
approach coexist, catering to specific users' needs, whether amateur or
professional? And, finally, will the type world come to terms with the
fact that appropriation and use of other's ideas have defined the
activity since its beginnings, and that it implies a serious rethinking
of concepts such as authorship, plagiarism and author's rights?

% SWAPHERE: Metafont \metafont
% SWAPHERE: TeX \tex

